# Project Description

Heterogeneity of cell populations caused by {{{define "quorum sensing"}}} leads to variability in gene expression that is hard to predict. During biomanufacturing, elevating quorum-induced protein expression will lead to gain of profit. Decreasing this expression can also be beneficial in situations where undesirable {{{define "biofilms"}}} may form on medical equipment or controlling {{{define "virulence"}}} in bacteria. We will modify the existing bacterial quorum sensing system controlled by the {{{define "Lsr operon"}}} by upregulating the synthesis and excretion of {{{define "Autoinducer-2"}}}, a universal quorum molecule. This will increase population-scale AI-2 intake and {{{define "phosphorylation"}}} after the initial AI-2 threshold concentrations have been reached to reduce variability in induced gene expression.

A model is used to predict the impacts of manipulating the expression of quorum sensing genes and guide design and experimentation. DNA assembly of a Biobricks containing {{{define "pLsr"}}}, {{{define "T7 RNA Polymerase"}}}, {{{define "LsrK"}}}, {{{define "LsrACDB"}}}, {{{define "LuxS"}}}, {{{define "YdgG"}}}, and superfolding Green Fluorescent Protein ({{{define "sfGFP"}}}) enables both the enhancement of natural quorum sensing and the quantification of protein activation among the bacteria in a colony. This device will improve the viability of {{{define "autoinduction"}}} as an induction method in industries such as biomanufacturing by decreasing the variability of a cell phenotypes and increasing expression within a single culture to reduce costs leading to an increase in profits. In addition, by insertion of T7 polymerase into a quorum-sensitive region of the genome of E. coli, we will create a chassis with specific, customizable quorum response for engineering and scientific applications.